Last week, I spent a few days in California, talking with ordinary Americans
in town halls and in the places they work. We talked about their struggles,
and we talked about their hopes. At the end of the day, these men and women
weren't as concerned with the news of the day in Washington as they were
about the very real and very serious challenges their families face every day:
whether they'll have a job and a paycheck to count on;
whether they'll be able to pay their medical bills or afford college tuition;
whether they'll be able to leave their children a world that's safer
and more prosperous than the one we have now.
Those are the concerns I heard about in California.
They’re the concerns I've heard about in letters from people throughout
this country for the last two years. And they are the concerns
addressed in the budget I sent to Congress last month.
With the magnitude of the challenges we face, I don't just view this budget
as numbers on a page or a laundry list of programs. It’s an economic
blueprint for our future -- a vision of America where growth is not based
on real estate bubbles or over-leveraged banks, but on a firm foundation
of investments in energy, education, and health care
that will lead to a real and lasting prosperity.
These investments are not a wish list of priorities that I picked out
of thin air – they’re a central part of a comprehensive strategy to grow this
economy by attacking the very problems that have dragged it down for
too long: the high cost of health care and our dependence on foreign oil;
our education deficit and our fiscal deficit.
Now, as the House and the Senate take up this budget next week, the
specific details and dollar amounts in this budget will undoubtedly change.
That’s a normal and healthy part of the process.
But when all is said and done,
I expect a budget that meets four basic principles.
First, it must reduce our dependence on dangerous foreign oil and finally
put this nation on a path to a clean, renewable energy future.
There’s no longer a doubt that the jobs and industries of tomorrow
will involve harnessing renewable sources of energy.
The only question is whether America will lead that future.
I believe we can and we will, and that's why we've proposed a budget that
makes clean energy the profitable kind of energy, while investing
in technologies like wind power and solar power; advanced biofuels, clean coal,
and fuel-efficient cars and trucks that can be built right here in America.
Second, this budget must renew our nation's commitment to a complete
and competitive education for every American child. In this global economy,
we know the countries that out-educate us today will out-compete us tomorrow,
and we know that our students are already falling behind their counterparts
in places like China. That’s why we have proposed investments in childhood
education programs that work; in high standards and accountability for our schools;
in rewards for teachers who succeed; and in affordable college education for
anyone who wants to go.  It is time to demand excellence from our schools
so that we can finally prepare our workforce for a 21st century economy.
Third, we need a budget that makes a serious investment in health care reform --
reform that will bring down costs, ensure quality, and guarantee people their
choice of doctors and hospitals. Right now, there are millions of Americans
who are just one illness or medical emergency away from bankruptcy.
There are businesses that have been forced to close their doors or ship jobs
overseas because they can't afford insurance. Medicare costs are consuming
our federal budget. Medicaid is overwhelming our state budgets.
So to those who say we have to choose between health care reform and fiscal
discipline, I say that making investments now that will dramatically lower
health care costs for everyone won't add to our budget deficit in the long-term
it’s one of the best ways to reduce it.
Finally, this budget must reduce that deficit even further.
With the fiscal mess we've inherited and the cost of this financial crisis,
I've proposed a budget that cuts our deficit in half by the end of my first term.
That's why we are scouring every corner of the budget and have proposed
$2 trillion in deficit reductions over the next decade.
In total, our budget would bring discretionary spending for domestic programs
as a share of the economy to its lowest level in nearly half a century.
And we will continue making these tough choices in the months and years ahead
so that as our economy recovers, we do what we must to bring down this deficit.
I’ll be discussing each of these principles next week, as Congress takes up the
important work of debating this budget. I realize there are those who say these
plans are too ambitious to enact. To that I say that the challenges we face
are too large to ignore. I didn't come here to pass on our problems to the
next President or the next generation -- I came here to solve them.
The American people sent us here to get things done, and at this moment of great
challenge, they are watching and waiting for us to lead. Let's show them
that we’re equal to the task before us, and let's pass a budget that
puts this nation on the road to lasting prosperity.